All right.
The other decision construct in Java
is the switch statement.
We're gonna talk about that in this video.
So, the switch statement transfers control
to one of several statements
depending on the value of an expression.
Now some things to remember
about a switch statement in Java.
A switch statement can only work with byte, short,
char, and int primitive data types.
It also works with enumerated types, the string class,
and the classes that wrap certain primitive types:
Character, Byte, Short, and Integer.
The default case label only matches an argument
if all the other labels do not regardless of its position.
The default label doesn't have to be the last label
in the case label list.
You can only have one default case label and block.
You don't need any case labels in the switch block.
The break statement is optional.
However, if it's omitted,
you are creating a fall-through situation.
The default case label and block are optional.
Case labels must be the same data type
as the result of the switch expression.
All right.
Let's run through several examples of switch statements,
which are valid but perhaps not common.
This first example I'm about to paste in
will demonstrate something called fall through,
which you're probably aware of,
and shows what happens when your default label
is not the last case label in the statement.
So, we're still under Decisions project
we started on in the last video.
I'm gonna create
a new class called SwitchExamplesFallThru.
'Kay.
There's the code.
Again, we're demonstrating fall through
in a default label in a spot other than the last spot.
So, the code wraps a switch statement in a for loop
that lets us test all of the switch statement's labels.
We have a string array that contains string values
that will match the switch labels.
We loop through the array and execute the switch statement.
Now the switch statement,
although perhaps not logically written here, is valid.
Let's actually run it.
Note that A fell through to every label below
because none of the labels has a break.
Now this is true for all the iterations.
When the variable is D,
then the starting point is the default label
because there's no D label.
The default label is executing in place,
meaning because it was declared prior to the labels
and none of the blocks contain a break,
executing the default label block
also executes all blocks below it.
All right.
Next, I wanna show you a switch statement
with an expression in the case label.
Now for that, we need a new class,
SwitchExampleCodeExpression.
What I think is interesting about this switch statement
is the label which concatenates one and two.
Expressions are allowed in case labels
only if the compiler can evaluate the compile time.
In this case, one and two are string literals,
so the compiler can introduce
that the resulting label will be string 12.
If you replace one of the literals
in this case label expression with a string variable,
for example, you'd find that the code wouldn't compile.
Let's actually run this.
You can see we've got the value output is 12.
Moving on now, our next switch statement demonstrates
a switch statement with an expression in a switch condition.
We need another class for this.
I'll call this one SwitchExampleSwitchExpression.
This code wraps a switch statement in a for loop
to test multiple labels.
Look at the switch expression itself.
It's fine to put an expression
as you can see me doing on line 16.
Note that whatever type the switch expression evaluates to
must also be the types of the case labels.
And also note the parentheses
around the case labels are optional.
Now let's run the code.
You can see the results.
All right.
Finally now let's try a switch statement with an enumeration
remembering that valid data types for the switch
are the byte, short, char, and int primitive data types
and their upper classes, enumerated types,
and string values.
Let's create yet another class,
SwitchExampleEnum.
Looking at the code, you can see I've defined an enum
on line 10.
Then we've got a for loop again.
Basically this code is using enumerated types,
looping through the enum values to test all labels.
We're also defining labels to allow multiple labels
to execute the same set of code
by equipping them strategically
and using the fall through feature of a switch statement.
All right.
Let's run the code.
There's the output.
Again, to clarify, the switch variable
cannot be a long, double, float, or boolean,
or any object other than the specified wrappers,
enum, or a string that I've mentioned in this video.
If you see a switch statement on the exam
using one of these types without a specific cast,
consider it gift.
Pick compiler error and move on.
So, this video and the previous one
covered the most basic decision constructs
for the switch statements and the if/else and their usages.
The next video, I'm gonna point out
some less than usual examples.
Let's move on to that video.